#encoding: utf-8


== About FriendlyId

FriendlyId is an add-on to Ruby's Active Record that allows you to replace ids
in your URLs with strings:

    # without FriendlyId
    http://example.com/states/4323454

    # with FriendlyId
    http://example.com/states/washington

It requires few changes to your application code and offers flexibility,
performance and a well-documented codebase.

=== Core Concepts

==== Slugs

The concept of "slugs[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slug_(web_publishing)]" is at
the heart of FriendlyId.

A slug is the part of a URL which identifies a page using human-readable
keywords, rather than an opaque identifier such as a numeric id. This can make
your application more friendly both for users and search engine.

==== Finders: Slugs Act Like Numeric IDs

To the extent possible, FriendlyId lets you treat text-based identifiers like
normal IDs. This means that you can perform finds with slugs just like you do
with numeric ids:

    Person.find(82542335)
    Person.find("joe")


== Setting Up FriendlyId in Your Model

To use FriendlyId in your ActiveRecord models, you must first extend the
FriendlyId module, then invoke the {FriendlyId::Base#friendly_id friendly_id}
method to configure your desired options:

    class Foo < ActiveRecord::Base
      extend FriendlyId
      friendly_id :bar, :use => [:slugged, :simple_i18n]
    end

The most important option is `:use`, which you use to tell FriendlyId which
addons it should use. See the documentation for this method for a list of all
available addons, or skim through the rest of the docs to get a high-level
overview.

=== The Default Setup: Simple Models

The simplest way to use FriendlyId is with a model that has a uniquely indexed
column with no spaces or special characters, and that is seldom or never
updated. The most common example of this is a user name:

    class User < ActiveRecord::Base
      extend FriendlyId
      friendly_id :login
      validates_format_of :login, :with => /\A[a-z0-9]+\z/i
    end

    @user = User.find "joe"   # the old User.find(1) still works, too
    @user.to_param            # returns "joe"
    redirect_to @user         # the URL will be /users/joe

In this case, FriendlyId assumes you want to use the column as-is; it will never
modify the value of the column, and your application should ensure that the
value is unique and admissible in a URL:

    class City < ActiveRecord::Base
      extend FriendlyId
      friendly_id :name
    end

    @city.find "Viña del Mar"
    redirect_to @city # the URL will be /cities/Viña%20del%20Mar

Writing the code to process an arbitrary string into a good identifier for use
in a URL can be repetitive and surprisingly tricky, so for this reason it's
often better and easier to use {FriendlyId::Slugged slugs}.


== Slugged Models

FriendlyId can use a separate column to store slugs for models which require
some text processing.

For example, blog applications typically use a post title to provide the basis
of a search engine friendly URL. Such identifiers typically lack uppercase
characters, use ASCII to approximate UTF-8 character, and strip out other
characters which may make them aesthetically unappealing or error-prone when
used in a URL.

    class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
      extend FriendlyId
      friendly_id :title, :use => :slugged
    end

    @post = Post.create(:title => "This is the first post!")
    @post.friendly_id   # returns "this-is-the-first-post"
    redirect_to @post   # the URL will be /posts/this-is-the-first-post

In general, use slugs by default unless you know for sure you don't need them.
To activate the slugging functionality, use the {FriendlyId::Slugged} module.

FriendlyId will generate slugs from a method or column that you specify, and
store them in a field in your model. By default, this field must be named
+:slug+, though you may change this using the
{FriendlyId::Slugged::Configuration#slug_column slug_column} configuration
option. You should add an index to this column, and in most cases, make it
unique. You may also wish to constrain it to NOT NULL, but this depends on your
app's behavior and requirements.

=== Example Setup

    # your model
    class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
      extend FriendlyId
      friendly_id :title, :use => :slugged
      validates_presence_of :title, :slug, :body
    end

    # a migration
    class CreatePosts < ActiveRecord::Migration
      def self.up
        create_table :posts do |t|
          t.string :title, :null => false
          t.string :slug, :null => false
          t.text :body
        end

        add_index :posts, :slug, :unique => true
      end

      def self.down
        drop_table :posts
      end
    end

=== Working With Slugs

==== Formatting

By default, FriendlyId uses Active Support's
paramaterize[http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Inflector.html#method-i-parameterize]
method to create slugs. This method will intelligently replace spaces with
dashes, and Unicode Latin characters with ASCII approximations:

  movie = Movie.create! :title => "Der Preis fürs Überleben"
  movie.slug #=> "der-preis-furs-uberleben"

==== Uniqueness

When you try to insert a record that would generate a duplicate friendly id,
FriendlyId will append a sequence to the generated slug to ensure uniqueness:

  car = Car.create :title => "Peugot 206"
  car2 = Car.create :title => "Peugot 206"

  car.friendly_id #=> "peugot-206"
  car2.friendly_id #=> "peugot-206--2"

==== Sequence Separator - The Two Dashes

By default, FriendlyId uses two dashes to separate the slug from a sequence.

You can change this with the {FriendlyId::Slugged::Configuration#sequence_separator
sequence_separator} configuration option.

==== Column or Method?

FriendlyId always uses a method as the basis of the slug text - not a column. It
first glance, this may sound confusing, but remember that Active Record provides
methods for each column in a model's associated table, and that's what
FriendlyId uses.

Here's an example of a class that uses a custom method to generate the slug:

  class Person < ActiveRecord::Base
    friendly_id :name_and_location
    def name_and_location
      "#{name} from #{location}"
    end
  end

  bob = Person.create! :name => "Bob Smith", :location => "New York City"
  bob.friendly_id #=> "bob-smith-from-new-york-city"

==== Providing Your Own Slug Processing Method

You can override {FriendlyId::Slugged#normalize_friendly_id} in your model for
total control over the slug format.

==== Deciding When to Generate New Slugs

Overriding {FriendlyId::Slugged#should_generate_new_friendly_id?} lets you
control whether new friendly ids are created when a model is updated. For
example, if you only want to generate slugs once and then treat them as
read-only:

  class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
    extend FriendlyId
    friendly_id :title, :use => :slugged

    def should_generate_new_friendly_id?
      new_record?
    end
  end

  post = Post.create!(:title => "Hello world!")
  post.slug #=> "hello-world"
  post.title = "Hello there, world!"
  post.save!
  post.slug #=> "hello-world"

==== Locale-specific Transliterations

Active Support's +parameterize+ uses
transliterate[http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Inflector.html#method-i-transliterate],
which in turn can use I18n's transliteration rules to consider the current
locale when replacing Latin characters:

  # config/locales/de.yml
  de:
    i18n:
      transliterate:
        rule:
          ü: "ue"
          ö: "oe"
          etc...

  movie = Movie.create! :title => "Der Preis fürs Überleben"
  movie.slug #=> "der-preis-fuers-ueberleben"

This functionality was in fact taken from earlier versions of FriendlyId.

==== Gotchas: Common Problems

FriendlyId uses a before_validation callback to generate and set the slug. This
means that if you create two model instances before saving them, it's possible
they will generate the same slug, and the second save will fail.

This can happen in two fairly normal cases: the first, when a model using nested
attributes creates more than one record for a model that uses friendly_id. The
second, in concurrent code, either in threads or multiple processes.

===== Nested Attributes

To solve the nested attributes issue, I recommend simply avoiding them when
creating more than one nested record for a model that uses FriendlyId. See {this
Github issue}[https://github.com/norman/friendly_id/issues/185] for discussion.

===== Concurrency

To solve the concurrency issue, I recommend locking the model's table against
inserts while when saving the record. See {this Github
issue}[https://github.com/norman/friendly_id/issues/180] for discussion.


== History: Avoiding 404's When Slugs Change

FriendlyId's {FriendlyId::History History} module adds the ability to store a
log of a model's slugs, so that when its friendly id changes, it's still
possible to perform finds by the old id.

The primary use case for this is avoiding broken URLs.

=== Setup

In order to use this module, you must add a table to your database schema to
store the slug records. FriendlyId provides a generator for this purpose:

  rails generate friendly_id
  rake db:migrate

This will add a table named +friendly_id_slugs+, used by the {FriendlyId::Slug}
model.

=== Considerations

This module is incompatible with the +:scoped+ module.

Because recording slug history requires creating additional database records,
this module has an impact on the performance of the associated model's +create+
method.

=== Example

    class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
      extend FriendlyId
      friendly_id :title, :use => :history
    end

    class PostsController < ApplicationController

      before_filter :find_post

      ...

      def find_post
        Post.find params[:id]

        # If an old id or a numeric id was used to find the record, then
        # the request path will not match the post_path, and we should do
        # a 301 redirect that uses the current friendly id.
        if request.path != post_path(@post)
          return redirect_to @post, :status => :moved_permanently
        end
      end
    end


== Unique Slugs by Scope

The {FriendlyId::Scoped} module allows FriendlyId to generate unique slugs
within a scope.

This allows, for example, two restaurants in different cities to have the slug
+joes-diner+:

    class Restaurant < ActiveRecord::Base
      extend FriendlyId
      belongs_to :city
      friendly_id :name, :use => :scoped, :scope => :city
    end

    class City < ActiveRecord::Base
      extend FriendlyId
      has_many :restaurants
      friendly_id :name, :use => :slugged
    end

    City.find("seattle").restaurants.find("joes-diner")
    City.find("chicago").restaurants.find("joes-diner")

Without :scoped in this case, one of the restaurants would have the slug
+joes-diner+ and the other would have +joes-diner--2+.

The value for the +:scope+ option can be the name of a +belongs_to+ relation, or
a column.

=== Finding Records by Friendly ID

If you are using scopes your friendly ids may not be unique, so a simple find
like

    Restaurant.find("joes-diner")

may return the wrong record. In these cases it's best to query through the
relation:

    @city.restaurants.find("joes-diner")

Alternatively, you could pass the scope value as a query parameter:

    Restaurant.find("joes-diner").where(:city_id => @city.id)


=== Finding All Records That Match a Scoped ID

Query the slug column directly:

    Restaurant.find_all_by_slug("joes-diner")

=== Routes for Scoped Models

Recall that FriendlyId is a database-centric library, and does not set up any
routes for scoped models. You must do this yourself in your application. Here's
an example of one way to set this up:

    # in routes.rb
    resources :cities do
      resources :restaurants
    end

    # in views
    <%= link_to 'Show', [@city, @restaurant] %>

    # in controllers
    @city = City.find(params[:city_id])
    @restaurant = @city.restaurants.find(params[:id])

    # URLs:
    http://example.org/cities/seattle/restaurants/joes-diner
    http://example.org/cities/chicago/restaurants/joes-diner


== Basic I18n

This {FriendlyId::SimpleI18n i18n} adds very basic i18n support to FriendlyId.

In order to use this module, your model must have a slug column for each locale.
By default FriendlyId looks for columns named, for example, "slug_en",
"slug_es", etc. The first part of the name can be configured by passing the
+:slug_column+ option if you choose. Note that as of 4.0.0.beta11, the column
for the default locale must also include the locale in its name.

Enable i18n use in your model with :

  class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
    extend FriendlyId
    friendly_id :title, :use => [:slugged, :simple_i18n]
  end

=== Example migration

  def self.up
    create_table :posts do |t|
      t.string :title
      t.string :slug_en
      t.string :slug_es
      t.text   :body
    end
    add_index :posts, :slug_en
    add_index :posts, :slug_es
  end

=== Finds

Finds will take into consideration the current locale:

  I18n.locale = :es
  Post.find("la-guerra-de-las-galaxas")
  I18n.locale = :en
  Post.find("star-wars")

To find a slug by an explicit locale, perform the find inside a block
passed to I18n's +with_locale+ method:

  I18n.with_locale(:es) do
    Post.find("la-guerra-de-las-galaxas")
  end

=== Creating Records

When new records are created, the slug is generated for the current locale only.

=== Translating Slugs

To translate an existing record's friendly_id, use
{FriendlyId::I18n::Model#set_friendly_id}. This will ensure that the slug you
add is properly escaped, transliterated and sequenced:

  post = Post.create :name => "Star Wars"
  post.set_friendly_id("La guerra de las galaxas", :es)

If you don't pass in a locale argument, FriendlyId::I18n will just use the
current locale:

  I18n.with_locale(:es) do
    post.set_friendly_id("la-guerra-de-las-galaxas")
  end


== Reserved Words

The {FriendlyId::Reserved Reserved} module adds the ability to exlude a list of
words from use as FriendlyId slugs.

By default, FriendlyId reserves the words "new" and "edit" when this module is
included. You can configure this globally by using {FriendlyId.defaults
FriendlyId.defaults}:

  FriendlyId.defaults do |config|
    config.use :reserved
    # Reserve words for English and Spanish URLs
    config.reserved_words = %w(new edit nueva nuevo editar)
  end