= FriendlyId

FriendlyId is the "Swiss Army bulldozer" of slugging and permalink plugins for
Ruby on Rails. It allows you to create pretty URL's and work with
human-friendly strings as if they were numeric ids for ActiveRecord models.

Using FriendlyId, it's easy to make your application use URL's like:

  http://example.com/states/washington

instead of:

  http://example.com/states/4323454

Want to find out more? Read on. The {most recent version of the FriendlyId
RDocs}[http://friendly-id.rubyforge.org] can always be found on
Rubyforge[http://www.rubyforge.org].

=== Why?

* Text-based id's look better
* They make URL's easier to remember.
* They give no hint about the number of records in your database.
* They are better for search engine optimization.

=== But...

* They can change, breaking your URL's and your SEO.
* It can be tricky to ensure they're always unique.
* They can become a pain to manage in large Rails applications.
* They can conflict with your application's namespace.

FriendlyId tries to offer you the all the advantages, and avoid or soften the
potential impact of the disadvantages.

== Typical Uses

=== User names ("non-slugged" models)

Usually users have unique user names stored in a column with a unique
constraint or index. In this case, all you need to do is add this to your
model:

  has_friendly_id :login

and you can then write code like this:

  @member = Member.find("joe")   # the old Member.find(1) still works, too.
  @member.to_param               # returns "joe"
  redirect_to @member            # The URL would be /members/joe

=== Blog posts ("slugged" models)

Blog posts generally have titles which are distinctive but not necessarily
unique. In this and similar cases, FriendlyId provides a Slug model separate
from your Post model. The Slug model handles duplicate friendly_ids, as well
as versioning.

Your model code would look something like this:

  has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true

and you can then write code like this:

  @post = Post.find("new-version-released")  # Post.find(1) still works, too
  @post.to_param                             # returns "new-version-released"
  redirect_to @post                          # The URL would be /posts/new-version-released

Now in your controllers, if you want to prevent people from accessing your
models by numeric id, you can detect whether they were found by the
friendly_id:

  @post = Post.find(params[:id])
  raise "some error" if !@post.found_using_friendly_id?

or, you can 301 redirect if the model was found by the numeric id if you don't
care about numeric access, but want the SEO value of the friendly_id:

  @post = Post.find(params[:id])
  redirect_to @post, :status => 301 if @post.has_better_id?

The "has_better_id?" method returns true if the model was found with the
numeric id, or with an outdated slug.

== Extra Features

=== Slug Versioning

FriendlyId will record changes to slugs so that you can tell when the model is
found with an older slug, or by the numeric id. This can be useful if you want
to do a 301 redirect to your updated URL.

  class PostsController < ApplicationController

    before_filter ensure_current_post_url, :only => :show

    ...

    def ensure_current_post_url
      redirect_to @post, :status => :moved_permanently if @post.has_better_id?
    end

  end

This is particularly useful when implementing FrindlyId on an existing
website that already has many URL's with the old numeric id listed on search
engines. When the search engine spiders crawl your site, they will
eventually pick up the new, more SEO-friendly URL's.

=== Non-unique Slug Names

FriendlyId will append a arbitrary number to the end of the id to keep it
unique if necessary:

  /posts/new-version-released
  /posts/new-version-released--2
  /posts/new-version-released--3
  ...
  etc.

Note that the number is preceeded by two dashes to distinguish it from the
rest of the slug. This is important to enable having slugs like:

  /cars/peugeot-206
  /cars/peugeot-206--2

=== Reserved Names

You can mark off some strings as reserved so that, for example, you don't end
up with this problem:

  /users/joe-schmoe # A user chose "joe schmoe" as his user name - no worries.
  /users/new # A user chose "new" as his user name, and now no one can sign up.

Here's how to do it:

  class Restaurant < ActiveRecord::Base
    belongs_to :city
    has_friendly_id :name, :use_slug => true, :reserved => ["my", "values"]
  end

As of FriendlyId version 2.0.2, "new" and "index" are reseved by default. When
you attempt to store a reserved value, FriendlyId raises a
FriendlyId::SlugGenerationError.

=== Cached slugs

Checking the slugs table all the time has an impact on performance, so as of
2.3.0, FriendlyId offers slug caching.

This feature can improve the performance of some views by about 25%, and reduce
memory consumption by about 40% as compared to the same view without cached
slugs. The biggest improvement will be for "index" type views with many links
that depend on slugs to generate the URL.

==== Automagic setup:

To enable slug caching, simply add a column named "cached_slug" to your model.
FriendlyId will automagically use this column if it detects it:

  class AddCachedSlugToUsers < ActiveRecord::Migration
    def self.up
      add_column :users, :cached_slug, :string
    end

    def self.down
      remove_column :users, :cached_slug
    end
  end

Then, redo the slugs:

  rake friendly_id:redo_slugs MODEL=User

This feature exists largely to improve the performance of URL
generation, the part of Rails where FriendlyId has the biggest
performance impact. FriendlyId never queries against this column, so
it's not necessary to add an index on it unless your application does.

Two warnings when using this feature:

*DO NOT* forget to redo the slugs, or else this feature will not work!

Also, this feature uses +attr_protected+ to protect the cached_slug
column, unless you have already invoked +attr_accessible+. So if you
wish to use +attr_accessible+, you must invoke it BEFORE you invoke
+has_friendly_id+ in your class.

==== Using a custom column name:

You can also use a different name for the column if you choose, via the
:cache_column config option:

  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    has_friendly_id :name, :use_slug => true, :cache_column => 'my_cached_slug'
  end

=== Scoped Slugs

FriendlyId can generate unique slugs within a given scope. For example:

  class Restaurant < ActiveRecord::Base
    belongs_to :city
    has_friendly_id :name, :use_slug => true, :scope => :city
  end

  class City < ActiveRecord::Base
    has_many :restaurants
    has_friendly_id :name, :use_slug => true
  end

  http://example.org/cities/seattle/restaurants/joes-diner
  http://example.org/cities/chicago/restaurants/joes-diner

  Restaurant.find("joes-diner", :scope => "seattle") # returns 1 record
  Restaurant.find("joes-diner", :scope => "chicago") # returns 1 record
  Restaurant.find("joes-diner") # returns both records


The value for the :scope key in your model can be a custom method you define,
or the name of a relation. If it's the name of a relation, then the scope's
text value will be the result of calling <code>to_param</code> on the related
model record. In the example above, the city model also uses FriendlyId and so
its <code>to_param</code> method returns its friendly_id: chicago or seattle.

This feature is new in FriendlyId 2 and should be considered of experimental
quality. Please don't use this for code that needs to run on the Space
Shuttle.

=== Text Normalization

FriendlyId's slugging can strip diacritics from Western European characters,
so that you can have ASCII-only URL's; for example, conveting "ñøîéçü" to
"noiecu."

  has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true, :strip_diacritics => true

If you are not using slugs, you'll have to do this manually for whatever value
you're using as the friendly_id.

=== Diacritic-sensitive normalization

FriendlyId can also normalize slug text while preserving accented characters, if
you prefer to leave them in your URL's:

  has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true
  ...
  @post = Post.create(:title => "¡Feliz Año!")
  @post.friendly_id # "feliz-año"

=== Unicode URL's

FriendlyId can generate slugs in any language that can be written with
Unicode. It does its best to strip away punctuation regardless of the language
being used. Since the authors only speak English, Spanish, Portuguese and
German, this has not been extensively tested with anything like Chinese,
Russian, Greek, etc, but it "should work." If you're a speaker of a language
that uses a non-Roman writing system, your feedback would be most welcome.

  has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true
  ...
  @post = Post.create(:title => "友好编号在中国")
  @post.friendly_id # "友好编号在中国"
  @post2 = Post.create(:title => "友好编号在中国")
  @post2.friendly_id # "友好编号在中国--2"

=== Custom Slug Generation

While FriendlyId's slug generation options work for most people, you may need
something else. As of version 2.0.4 you can pass in your own custom slug
generation block:

  class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
    has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true do |text|
      MySlugGeneratorClass::my_slug_method(text)
    end
  end

FriendlyId will still respect your settings for max length and reserved words,
but will use your block rather than the baked-in methods to normalize the
friendly_id text.

== Getting it

FriendlyId is best installed as a Ruby Gem:

  gem install friendly_id

Alternatively, you can install it as a Rails plugin, though this is
discouraged:

  ./script/plugin install git://github.com/norman/friendly_id.git

== Setting it up

The current release works with Rails 2.2 and above, and is compatible with
Ruby 1.8 and 1.9. If you need support for Rails 2.0 - 2.1, you need to install
an older version of FriendlyId. Here's how to set it up.

1) Install the Gem:

  sudo gem install friendly_id
  cd my_app
  script/generate friendly_id
  rake db:migrate

2) Add the gem to config/environment.rb:

  config.gem "friendly_id"

3) Add some code to your models:

  class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
    has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true
  end

4) If you are using slugs, you can use a Rake task to generate slugs for your
existing records:

rake friendly_id:make_slugs MODEL=MyModelName

If you eventually want to expire old slugs every so often, or perhaps every
day via cron, you can do:

rake friendly_id:remove_old_slugs

The default is to remove dead slugs older than 45 days, but is configurable:

rake friendly_id:remove_old_slugs MODEL=MyModelName DAYS=60

== Installing an older version

You can download older versions of FriendlyId from Github that work with Rails <
2.2. These versions are, however, no longer maintained or supported.

== Hacking FriendlyId:

FriendlyId is {hosted on Github}[git://github.com/norman/friendly_id.git], and
we love pull requests. :-)

== Bugs:

Please report them on the {Github issue tracker}[http://github.com/norman/friendly_id/issues]
for this project.

If you have a bug to report, please include the following information:

* Stack trace and error message.
* Version information for FriendlyId, Rails and Ruby.
* Any snippets of relevant model, view or controller code that shows how your are using FriendlyId.

If you are able to, it helps even more if you can fork FriendlyId on Github, and
add a test that reproduces the error you are experiencing.

== Credits:

FriendlyId was created by {Norman Clarke}[mailto:norman@njclarke.com],
{Adrian Mugnolo}[mailto:adrian@mugnolo.com], and {Emilio Tagua}[mailto:miloops@gmail.com].

We are grateful for many contributions from the Ruby and Rails community, in
particular from the following people:

* Adam Cigánek
* Alistair Holt
* Andrew Loe III
* Bence Nagy
* Bruno Michel
* Chris Nolan
* David Ramalho
* Diego Carrion
* Florian Aßmann
* Harry Love
* Jesse Crouch
* Joe Van Dyk
* Josh Nichols
* Mikhail Shirkov
* Nathan Phelps
* Rob Ingram
* Sean Abrahams
* Steve Luscher
* Tim Kadom

Copyright (c) 2008 Norman Clarke, Adrian Mugnolo and Emilio Tagua, released
under the MIT license.
