h1. FriendlyId

FriendlyId is a plugin for Ruby on Rails which allows you to work with
human-friendly strings as well as numeric ids for ActiveRecord models.

There are a number of reasons you might want to use textual id's in your
models. The main use we intend friendly_id for is in URL's, so your application
can have URL's like:

http://example.com/states/washington

rather than

http://example.com/states/4323454

h2. Why?

* Text-based id's look better
* They make URL's easier to remember.
* They give no hint about the number of records in your database.
* They are better for search engine optimization.

h3. But...

* They can change, breaking your URL's.
* They can have invalid URL characters, breaking your links in some browsers.
* It can be tricky to ensure they're always unique.

FriendlyId tries to offer you the all the advantages, and avoid or soften the
potential impact of the disadvantages.

h2. Typical Uses

h3. User names ("non-slugged" models)

Usually users have unique user names stored in a column with a unique
constraint or index. In this case, all you need to do is add this to your
model:

  has_friendly_id :login

and you can then write code like this:

<pre>
	@member = Member.find("joe")   # the old Member.find(1) still works, too.
	@member.to_param               # returns "joe"
	redirect_to @member            # The URL would be /members/joe
</pre>

h3. Blog posts ("slugged" models)

Blog posts generally have title which are *usually* unique, but don't
necessarily have to be.

In this and similar cases, FriendlyId provides a Slug model separate from your
Post model. The Slug model handles duplicate friendly_ids, as well as
versioning.

Your model code would look something like this:

  has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true

and you can then write code like this:

<pre>
	@post = Post.find("new-version-released")  # Post.find(1) still works, too
	@post.to_param                             # returns "new-version-released"
	redirect_to @post                          # The URL would be /posts/new-version-released
</pre>

Now in your controllers, if you want to prevent people from accessing your
models by numeric id, you can detect whether they were found by the
friendly_id:

  @post.find(params[:id])
  raise "some error" if !@post.found_using_friendly_id?

or, you can 301 redirect if the model was found by the numeric id if you don't
care about numeric access, but want the SEO value of the friendly_id:

  @post.find(params[:id])
  redirect_to @post, :status => 301 if @post.has_better_id?

The "has_better_id?" method returns true if the model was found with the
numeric id, or with an outdated slug.

h2. Extra Features

h3. Slug Versioning

FriendlyId will record changes to slugs so that you can tell when the model
is found with an older slug. This can be useful if you want to do a 301
redirect to your updated URL.

	def find_record_using_friendly_id
	  @post = Post.find(params[:id])
	  redirect_to @post, :status => :moved_permanently if @post.has_better_id?
	end
	
h3. Unique Slug Names

FriendlyId will append a number to the end of the id to keep it unique if
necessary:

  /posts/new-version-released
  /posts/new-version-released-2
  /posts/new-version-released-3
  etc.

h3. Text Normalization

FriendlyId's slugging can strip diacritics from Western European characters,
for example conveting "ñøîéçü" to "noiecu."

  has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true, :strip_diacritics => true

If you are not using slugs, you'll have to do this manually for whatever value
you're using as the friendly_id.

Note that this ovbiously won't work for Chinese, Arabic, Russian, Hebrew,
Thai, etc. because it will pretty much blow away all the chracters... it's
only for languages that use some variant of the Roman alphabet.

You must install the "unicode" and "iconv" to use this feature.

h3. This is all too complicated. Why not just override to_param to return the
id followed by a dasherized string?

This creates URL's like the following:

  http://www.example.org/profiles/12-joe

Which works great. But at times you may prefer not having the id in the URL.

  http://www.example.org/profiles/joe
  
Note that if you are using the to_param trick for URL's, you should check to
make sure your URL's are being accessed with the most up-to-date slug, because
the following two URL's will point to the same content:

  http://www.example.org/posts/12-i-love-friend-id
  http://www.example.org/profiles/12-friendly-id-sucks

In these cases it's convenient to have a before_filter in your controller
that does something like this:

  def ensure_current_url
    if request.headers['REQUEST_URI'] != post_path(@post)
      redirect_to @post, :status => :moved_permanently
    end  
  end



h2. Getting it

Git repository: git://github.com/norman/friendly_id.git

h2. Setting it up
  
  cd my_app
  script/plugin install git://github.com/norman/friendly_id.git
  script/generate friendly_id_migration
  rake db:migrate
  
Now add some code to your models:

<pre>
  class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
    has_friendly_id :title, :use_slug => true
  end
</pre>
  
If you are using slugs, you can use a Rake task to generate slugs for your existing
records:

friendly_id:make_slugs MODEL=MyModelName

If you eventually want to expire old slugs every so often, or perhaps every
day via cron, you can do:

rake:friendly_id:remove_old_slugs

The default is to remove dead slugs older than 45 days, but is configurable:

rake:friendly_id:remove_old_slugs MODEL=MyModelName DAYS=60

h2. Bugs:

Please report them on "Lighthouse":http://randomba.lighthouseapp.com/projects/14675-friendly_id.

h2. Credits:

FriendlyId was created by "Norman Clarke":mailto:norman@randomba.org and 
"Adrian Mugnolo":mailto:adrian@randomba.org.

Copyright (c) 2008 Norman Clarke and Adrian Mugnolo, released under the MIT
license.